Indicators and assessment systems: caught between policy and science?

Torsten Berg, MariLim aquatic research GmbH, Heinrich-Wöhlk-Straße 14, 24232 Schönkirchen, Germany

ABSTRACT

There are over 200 pieces of legislation in Europe with a direct relationship to marine waters. Most of them only deal with one sector of marine sustainable use and protection. Many were driven by societal concerns and urgent needs, often targeting specific environmental problems. Over the years, harmonizing these policies has lead to a complex management task, sometimes with conflicting demands. Gradually, these sectoral directives are superseded or subsumed into holistic frameworks such as the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). They call for integrative assessment and an ecosystem-based approach (EBA). Today, it is crucial that indicators and assessment systems follow this vision. Developing indicators is no longer an isolated exercise but needs to be embedded into the overall approach. This involves being clear about the scope of the indicator to avoid overlap with related indicators within the same framework. Also, it must be decided which stage the indicator is representing in the management cycle. As an example, pressure indicators aim to minimize anthropogenic pressures and potentially influence their societal drivers while state indicators describe and assess the environmental state as a result of these pressures. These aspects are related to the question whether the indicator should represent structural or functional components of the ecosystem. Still, science tends to follow a bottom-up approach, starting with isolated indicator development and only caring for the integrative nature of the assessment at a late stage. To successfully make indicators fit for purpose, a top-down approach should be used. Deriving the cornerstones of an indicator from the requirements of policy and legislation ensures that it fits into the overall assessment system and enhances its acceptance. To this end, a close cooperation with the responsible organizations is vital, ideally involving them in the development process. This also enables science to provide early feedback and advice to stakeholders, working towards consistency between societal demands, the corresponding scientific knowledge and the actual implementation of policies in a complex reality.
